Chocolate is a food made from roasted and ground cocoa beans. It can be a liquid, solid, or paste. It is eaten on its own and used to flavor other foods. 
Cocoa beans are the processed seeds of the cacao tree (Theobroma cacao). They are usually fermented to develop the flavor, then dried, cleaned, and roasted. The shell is removed to reveal nibs, which are ground to chocolate liquor (unadulterated chocolate in rough form.) The liquor can be further processed into cocoa butter and cocoa powder, or shaped and sold as unsweetened baking chocolate. By adding sugar, sweetened chocolates are produced, which can be sold simply as dark chocolate, or, with the addition of milk, can be made into milk chocolate. Making chocolate with only cocoa butter and milk produces white chocolate. 
Chocolate is one of the most popular food types and flavors in the world, and many foodstuffs include chocolate, particularly desserts, including ice creams, cakes, mousse, and cookies. Many candies are filled with or coated with sweetened chocolate. Chocolate bars, either made of solid chocolate or other ingredients coated in chocolate, are eaten as snacks. Gifts of chocolate molded into different shapes (such as eggs, hearts, and coins) are traditional on certain holidays, including Christmas, Easter, Valentine's Day, Hanukkah and Eid al-Fitr. Chocolate is also used in cold and hot beverages, such as chocolate milk, hot chocolate and chocolate liqueur.
The cacao tree was first used as a source for food in what is today Ecuador at least 5,300 years ago. Mesoamerican civilizations widely consumed cacao beverages, and in the 16th century, one of these beverages, chocolate, was introduced to Europe. Until the 19th century, chocolate was a drink consumed by societal elite. In the wake of technological advances chocolate became a mass-consumed solid food. Cocoa beans for most chocolate are grown in West African countries, particularly Ivory Coast and Ghana, which contribute about 60% of the world's cocoa supply.